.\" This file is part of the uCodev Bandwidth Tester (ubwt) project (https://www.ucodev.org)
.TH UBWT "8" "April 2021" "uCodev Bandwidth Tester" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ubwt \- uCodev Bandwidth Tester
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ubwt
[ \fIOPTIONS\fR ] { \fIconnector\fR | \fIlistener\fR } { \fIHOSTNAME\fR | \fIIPv4\fR | \fIIPv6\fR }
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The \fBubwt\fR(8) (uCodev Bandwidth Tester) is a command line binary utility designed to perform network bandwidth testing. It allows unidirectional (\fBdefault\fR), bidirectional (\fB\-b\fR), reverse (\fB\-R\fR) and asynchronous full-duplex (\fB\-A\fR) testing modes, providing a summary of the network bandwidth capabilities, or an extended report (\fB\-F\fR).
.PP
It consists of a single binary tool that can act as a \fBconnector\fR in one end, and as a \fBlistener\fR on another end, allowing multiple concurrent connections by using multiple workers (\fB\-W\fR), each worker representing one connection.
.PP
The addresses of the listener and connector can be specified as a \fBHOSTNAME\fR, an \fBIPv4\fR or as an \fBIPv6\fR.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
When using command line \fBOPTIONS\fR with \fBubwt\fR(8), make sure they are exactly the same on both listener and connector. Failing to do so, one of the ends will either reject the other end transmission, or the behaviour of one or both ends will be undefined.
.PP
The available command line \fBOPTIONS\fR are:
.PP
.TP
\fB\-A\fR
Asynchronous bi-directional full-duplex test. TCP only.
.TP
\fB\-b\fR
Perform a bi-directional test.
.TP
\fB\-B\fR \fIOCTETS\fR
Size of the round-robin buffer used for payload. Requires \fB\-C\fR.
.TP
\fB\-C\fR \fIFILE\fR
Creates a buffer from file to fill the payload. Requires \fB\-B\fR.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR \fIFILE\fR
Append debugging output to a file (default: stderr).
.TP
\fB\-D\fR
Enable debugging.
.TP
\fB\-F\fR
Enable full/extended reporting.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR
Prints the help.
.TP
\fB\-I\fR \fIMSEC\fR
Interval between latency measurements (default: 1 msec).
.TP
\fB\-j\fR \fIFILE\fR
Export report in JSON format to file.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR \fIOCTETS\fR
Link MTU (default: 1500 octets).
.TP
\fB\-M\fR \fIMULTIPLIER\fR
Talk count multiplier (default: auto).
.TP
\fB\-N\fR \fIITERATIONS\fR
Number of handshake iterations (default: 20 iterations).
.TP
\fB\-o\fR \fISECONDS\fR
Process reverse delay. Sets -b (default: 3 seconds).
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fISECONDS\fR
Maximum wait time before next stream (default: 20 seconds).
.TP
\fB\-p\fR \fIPROTOCOL\fR
L4 protocol: 'tcp' or 'udp' (default: tcp).
.TP
\fB\-P\fR \fIPORT\fR
TCP or UDP port to listen/connect to (default: 19991).
.TP
\fB\-r\fR \fIFILE\fR
Store the running PID into the specified file.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR
Reverse stream testing first.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR \fIOCTETS\fR
L4 payload size (default: 1432).
.TP
\fB\-t\fR \fISECONDS\fR
Minimum stream time (default: 3 seconds).
.TP
\fB\-T\fR \fISECONDS\fR
Maximum wait time between stream packets (default: 5 seconds).
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
Display version information.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR \fISECONDS\fR
Connection timeout (default: 120 seconds).
.TP
\fB\-W\fR \fICOUNT\fR
Maximum number of workers (default: 1). TCP only.
.SH EXAMPLE
.EX

alice@serv.my.lan ~ $ ubwt listener 0.0.0.0

bob@client.my.lan ~ $ ubwt connector serv.my.lan
.EE
.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 3
This tool is not meant to be used as a system service - it is not a daemon, and wasn't designed to become one.
.IP \(bu
If you need to auto-restart the listener, use a loop in the shell, for example:
.EX

    while :; do
        ubwt listener 0.0.0.0
        if [ ${?} -ne 0 ]; then
            break;
        fi
    done
.EE
.IP \(bu
If you are running the test in a system with poor real time measurements, use \fB\-M\fR with a reasonable multiplier value, for example, 10.
.IP \(bu
Asynchronous full-duplex test mode may not be completely fair. Use it to get estimates, not precise measurements.
.IP \(bu
Avoid using UDP tests unless you really know what you are doing.
.IP \(bu
Balance the number of workers properly - more workers is usually good, until too much workers become very bad. Start with something like 4 or 8.
.IP \(bu
To adjust precision, make sure MTU and L4 payload size are properly set for the network under test. Usually the default values are OK, but fine tunning these values may yield better results.
.IP \(bu
When testing symmetric links with bidirectional tests and you find out that there's a considerable difference between the download and upload measurements, slightly increase the default value of \fB\-o\fR (to 5 or 10 seconds). This assumes that you already excluded any other reasons, such as traffic from other sources present in the network that is tampering the bandwidth test.
.IP \(bu
If a measurement doens't feel right, start by increasing the minimum stream time with the \fB\-t\fR option.
.IP \(bu
When performing tests over compressed links and compression is not desired, make use of the \fB-B\fR and \fB-C\fR options so the sender payload is not set to 0 (which it is by default). Using \fI/dev/random\fR as the source for \fB-C\fR usually delivers good results in these situations, but a test with \fI/dev/zero\fR should be performed first to serve as a base comparision, as well as to exclude any processing overhead that is added by the sending routine while reading from the buffer, and writting to the payload, for each transmission unit. Note that \fB\-B\fR and \fB\-C\fR options have no effect on the receiver side.
.IP \(bu
A connector is a sender by default, unless \fB\-R\fR is set, making it a receiver.
.IP \(bu
A listener is a receiver by default, unless \fB\-R\fR is set, making it a sender.
.IP \(bu
When using \fB\-b\fR, both connector and listener will act as a sender and as a receiver.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Pedro A. Hortas (pah@ucodev.org).
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report ubwt bugs to \fIpah@ucodev.org\fR
.SH COPYRIGHT
.PP
Copyright \(co 2021  Pedro A. Hortas (pah@ucodev.org)
.PP
License: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gplv3.fsf.org/>
.PP
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions. There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.PP
